Subtask 1 (cycle):

The idea is to circle around the circle.

We need 2 colors: INIT and DONE.
Always set the current node to DONE and go to an INIT. If no INITs, terminate.

Code: emil_cycle_2.cpp

Subtask 2 (star):

The idea is that we can distinguish whether we are in a leaf or the base of the star. So we'll just visit all leaves and mark them and then terminate.

We need 2 colors: INIT and DONE.
If in a leaf set the current node to DONE and go to the base of the star. If in the base of the star, go to an INIT leaf. If no INIT leaves, terminate.

Code: emil_star_2.cpp

Subtask 3 (path):

The idea is we go to 1 end of the path and then to the other and then terminate.

We need 3 colors: INIT, LEFT and DONE.

First, if we see no DONEs, we are in phase 1, so we set current node to LEFT and move to an INIT. If no INITs, switch to phase 2. In phase 2: set current node to DONE and move to an INIT or a LEFT. If no INITs and no LEFTs, terminate. Notice that phase switching and termination can only happen in leaves.

Code: emil_path_3.cpp

Subtask 4 (tree):

The idea is to run a DFS.

We need 3 colors: INIT, DFS and DONE.

INIT are unvisited nodes. DONE are visited nodes whose full subtree has been explored. DFS are nodes that are currently on the path from the start (root) to the current node (i.e. they are on the DFS stack).

The strategy is: if we see any INITs, set the current node to DFS and go to an INIT. Otherwise, if we see any DFSs (there can be at most one), set the current node to DONE and go to the DFS. Otherwise (we must be in the root), terminate.

Code: emil_tree_3.cpp

Subtasks 5-7:

The problem:

We can try running this on a non-tree and the issue is when we need to backtrack but the current node has a back edge. Then we see multiple DFS nodes and cannot know which way to go.

There is a "known" approach that works on general graphs, seen in some past problems (such as Robot at IOI 2023) of running a BFS using layered DFS runs that expand it by 1 layer each time. The idea is that a BFS tree has no back edges (only edges to the previous, current or next layers). So we can record the distance from the root to the current node modulo 3 and this way we can classify each edge. Naively, such a solution might take 19 colors, but it is possible to do this with 8 colors. However, this approach cannot be used for this problem, since the number of iteration it needs is O(N^2), while here we need O(N) iterations.

In general, anything that is not effectively a DFS will need a superlinear number of steps. Therefore, we want to do a DFS. However, we can see that this is not possible on a general graph: In order to backtrack, we need to have a way to recover the DFS stack, which is basically a permutation. The issue is that there are N! possible permutations, while there are only N * C^N possible configurations (for some constant C). Thus, we need to specifically take advantage of the fact that the graph is a cactus.

Solution N + 1 colors:

The above argument does not hold if C = N. One simple solution that works even in a general graph is to run a DFS, but instead of a DFS color have N DFS colors, marking the depth of the node. Then when we backtrack, we just go to the deepest node with depth smaller than ours (this way we don't even need a DONE color). If we need to backtrack from the root (which has depth 0), we terminate. This solution gets 15% of the points for these subtasks.

Code: emil_cactus_bad_n+1.cpp

Subtask 5:

This subtask serves a few purposes.

Firstly, it allows solutions with O(MaxDegree) number of colors: storing which node is our parent, which relies on the fact that the order of adjColors is consistent across multiple visits to the same node. This again, works on a general graph with bounded degree.

Secondly, it simplifies some of the cases of any of the full solution ideas and allows easier elimination of some of their colors. Notably, in this subtask, each node is part of at most one cycle, which simplifies a lot of things. Additionally, since the starting node has degree 1, in most solutions we'd only start there and finish there, so we don't need to worry about special cases due to the root.

Key observation:

The key observation is that in a cactus back edges are much more well behaved than ones in a general graph. This results in several concrete observations. Various solutions (and variations on solutions) use various subsets of these.

1. Each node has at most 1 back edge (this is because the parent-self edge would be in two simple cycles). Therefore while running a DFS, each node sees at most 2 DFS nodes.

2. If a node has a back edge, its parent cannot have a back edge (this is because the grandparent-parent edge would be in two simple cycles).

We have 3 types of solutions:

1. Storing parent information along the DFS path/stack.
2. Storing child information along the DFS path/stack.
3. Storing no such information and instead finding it when we need to backtrack.

We will cover 1., then 3. and finally 2.

Solution storing parent information:

First, we explore a solution where we store parent information along the DFS path whose optimized version uses 6 colors and takes 4N time.

The idea is to do something similar to what we can for subtask 5. Since each node sees at most 2 DFS nodes (one of which is its parent), we can simply record which of the 2 is its actual parent. Basically, for all DFS-like colors (i.e. colors of nodes along the DFS path), we have 2 versions, specifying which node is the current nodes

The colors we need are: INIT, DONE, DFS, DFS_FRONT, DFS_NEW (8 in total).

The idea is each time we go to an INIT, we leave the current node in DFS_FRONT. Then its child can identify it as its parent, figure out its index (0 or 1) among the DFS-like nodes it sees. Then the child is colored in DFS_NEW and we go to the parent. Now the parent returns to DFS and goes to the DFS_NEW. Then we proceed normally. When we need to backtrack, we just backtrack to the DFS-like node according to the index the current node stores.

Code: emil_cactus_par_8.cpp

We can optimize this to 6 colors by removing DFS_NEW. We can merge it with DFS_FRONT. Everything works normally, except that when we are in a DFS_FRONT node, we figure out whether it is the real DFS_FRONT or the DFS_NEW based on whether it sees another DFS_FRONT node.

Code: emil_cactus_par_6.cpp

These solutions need 4N time, since the robot goes through each tree edge 4 times (and doesn't go through back edges).

Better solution with parent information:

The issue with the above ideas (besides needing 4N iterations) is that the number of DFS-like states is multiplied by 2 due to storing the index of the parent in the node. A much better idea is to simply mark the parent on its own node. Then when we need to backtrack, if we have a back-edge, we just backtrack to the marked parent. The key is that we only need this marking if the current node has a back-edge. And if that is the case, no node can have a back-edge to the current node's parent. We detect that this is needed when we enter an INIT node and we see 2 DFS-like nodes. Finally, we need to figure out how to mark the parent. We can reuse the same synchronization scheme as in the previous solutions: Mark the current node as DFS_FRONT when descending. Then, if the new node has no back-edge, mark it as DFS_FRONT and go back to the parent. Then, the parent becomes DFS and returns to the child and then continue normally. However, if the child sees a back-edge, it just continues directly and the parent is left as DFS_FRONT. This needs only 4 colors, but 4N iterations.

Code: emil_cactus_parimp_4.cpp.

Solution storing no extra information:

This is our best solution since it can be optimized to 4 colors.

In this solution we won't record any extra info while running the DFS. Instead, we'll figure out which node is our parent when we need to backtrack. If we only see one DFS-like node, we just go to it. If not, then we must have a back edge. Therefore, our parent cannot have a back edge. Therefore, our parent would see only one DFS-like node (excluding the current node). On the other hand, any other DFS-like node would see at least 2 DFS-like nodes (its parent and its child); however, the root is an exception to this (so we can use an extra color for it -- notice that this case does not matter in subtask 5).

The colors we need are: INIT, DONE, DFS, DFS_ROOT, PARSEEK, PARFOUND, DFS_PAR, DFS_NOTPAR (8 in total).

The color DFS_ROOT will be used only for the root. That way, if we see a DFS node and a DFS_ROOT node, we know the DFS one is our parent. So the only issue is if we see 2 DFS nodes. In that case, we mark the current node with PARSEEK, meaning we are looking for its parent. Then we go to a DFS node. Then (we know we are in this case, since we see a PARSEEK node), we check whether it is the parent or not (based on how many DFS-like nodes it sees). If yes, set it to DFS_PAR. Otherwise, set it to DFS_NOTPAR. In either case, go back to the PARSEEK node. There, we may need to do this again until we see a DFS_PAR node.

Once we see a DFS_PAR, we need to clean up the DFS_NOTPAR ones (if any), color the current node in PARFOUND and go to the DFS_NOTPAR. There, color it in DFS and go back to the PARFOUND node. Finally, set the current node to DONE and go to the DFS_PAR node. Notice that it will be overwritten with DFS (if exploring further), DONE (if backtracking), (or PARSEEK, if the same could happen, but it cannot).

This solution does at most 6 steps per node with back edge. In a cactus, at most half the nodes have back edges (the maximum number of edges is 3N/2). Therefore in total we get 2N + 6N/2 = 5N iterations. Notice that it also (currently) doesn't use the ordering of the adjacency list being consistent.

Code: emil_cactus_find_8.cpp

There are multiple possible optimizations, which can mostly be done in any order. We'll present one order of doing them, but you can also find codes for some other orders in the sample solutions.

First, we can remove PARFOUND, its only purpose is to tell the DFS_NOTPAR node that it needs to clear itself. However, this is the only situation in which we are ever in a DFS_NOTPAR node. Therefore, we can merge PARFOUND with PARSEEK.

Code: emil_cactus_find_7_no-found.cpp

We can also remove the DFS_ROOT and merge it with DFS with one key observation. Let's see what the "issue" is if we do this. Everything works, until we have a back edge to the root. If we first try our actual parent, everything is fine. However, if we try the root, it looks just as if it is our parent (only sees one DFS-like node), so we'll "mistakenly" go to it. However, we can imagine this as something like a DFS (which keeps a stack of nodes), but at this point "flipping" the stack, i.e. swapping which side we're expanding from. The important invariant that all the DFS-like nodes form a single path still holds. Therefore, we'll still visit all nodes and then terminate (though this termination might just not happen from the root, which is not an issue). Notice that the new subtree of the old root cannot have "back-edges" to above the root (in the flipped stack). Additionally, the other end of the stack (the new "root") has visited all of its other children, so it will never be a back-edge. Therefore this stack-flipping/rerooting operation will only happen once.

Code: emil_cactus_find_6_no-found-root.cpp

Next, we can also exploit the fact that we have consistent ordering in order to remove DFS_NOTPAR and merge it with DFS. This optimization will also lower the number of iterations to 3N. When we try a node (i.e. when we see PARSEEK), we'll just either mark it with DFS_PAR or leave it as DFS and return to the PARSEEK node. Then when we are in PARSEEK (note that we are not actually in PARSEEK before we try the first of the 2 DFS nodes), we can see that either we found the parent (so we just backtrack to it) or did not (in which case we only see 2 DFS nodes). In that latter case we can just backtrack to the other DFS node (i.e. at the start always try the left DFS node and in this case always backtrack to the right DFS node). Besides removing one color, this also makes us only do 2 extra steps per back edge, for a total of 3N steps, which also lets us get points from subtask 7.

Code: emil_cactus_find_5_no-root-found-notpar.cpp

Finally, we can merge PARSEEK and DFS_PAR in a similar way to how we merged DFS_FRONT and DFS_NEW in the other solution. Now, we when the current node is in this new PARSEEK_OR_PAR color, we treat it as PARSEEK when we see 2 DFS nodes or see another PARSEEK_OR_PAR node (which we treat as DFS_PAR). We also treat it as PARSEEK, if we are in a DFS node and see a PARSEEK_OR_PAR (it is just PARSEEK). However, if we are in PARSEEK_OR_PAR, but see no other PARSEEK_OR_PAR and see at most 1 DFS node, we must be in DFS_PAR.

Code: emil_cactus_find_4_no-found-root-notpar-par.cpp

Some variations:

Next are some interesting variations not covered above, that would be interesting to understand and show useful techniques for such problems. Additionally, it is interesting to see what hte best solution is if the adjacency list is unordered (e.g. if the grader shuffles it each time).

Clearing DFS_NOTPAR with PARSEEK_OR_PAR:

Let's see whether we can remove the DFS_PAR color (merge it with PARSEEK) without removing the DFS_NOTPAR color (and without depending on the consistent order of the adjacent nodes).

There is an issue when we try to clear DFS_NOTPAR and see two PARSEEK_OR_PAR nodes (can happen when there is a triangle, i.e. a cycle with 3 nodes). In this situation we can simply "guess" which node is the PARSEEK one and go to it (clearing to DFS, as usual). Then when we are in a PARSEEK_OR_PAR node, but see INITs, this must have happened and we must have guessed wrongly, so we just go to the adjacent PARSEEK_OR_PAR (while keeping that node as PARSEEK_OR_PAR) -- this fixes the wrong guess with one extra step. Notice that in case the DFS_PAR had already visited all its other children, we may "mistakenly" think it is the real PARSEEK. However, this is not an issue, since this just mean we backtrack the other way around the tringle but everything is still correct after that. This ends up with 5.5 N iterations in total.

Code: emil_cactus_find_5_no-found-root-par.cpp

Lazy DFS_NOTPAR clearing:

In all of the above solutions that do have DFS_NOTPAR we can actually just not clear it. Let's look at doing this on our simplest solution. When we are in PARSEEK and see a DFS_NOTPAR, we will just backtrack to the DFS node. This would leave some DFS_NOTPAR nodes lying around, but no node would have them as a back-edge. Additionally, that node's child cannot have any back-edge. Therefore, we never see both DFS and DFS_NOTPAR while traversing normally. So we just act normally or backtrack to the DFS_NOTPAR, if it is the only DFS-like node we see. This solution only does 3N steps, which means we can pass the last subtask even without any of the other optimizations.

Code: emil_cactus_find_7_no-found_lazy-notpar.cpp

The above argumentation only works until we remove the DFS_ROOT color. This is because once we switch the root the stack is flipped. There are no back edges from the new subtree of the old root until we backtrack above the root. Then it is possible for some node to have a back-edge to a DFS_NOTPAR node. However, in that case it would also have a regular DFS node and that must be its parent. Additionally, such a node cannot have another back-edge. Therefore, we can just ignore the DFS_NOTPAR nodes unless we see no DFS node, in which case we backtrack to the DFS_NOTPAR node. All of this also works if we merge PARSEEK and DFS_PAR, so this is actually a cleaner resolution to the issue from before. Thus we get a 5 color, 3N iterations solution to the unordered version of the problem.

Code: emil_cactus_find_5_no-found-root-par_lazy-notpar.cpp

Lazy PARSEEK clearing:

In the previous solutions, we merged PARSEEK and DFS_PAR. Note that DFS_PAR is needed only for clearing the PARSEEK. Another idea is to simply not clear the PARSEEK immediatelly (if we happen to guess the right parent, but just leave it there). Of course, to have any chance, we need to only go to PARSEEK, if it looks like we might be answering its query, i.e. if we see 2 or more DFS-like nodes. There is still an issue with this is -- if we later mistakenly thin we are answering the PARSEEK; this can only happen, if we actually are in the middle of answering another PARSEEK and we are not the parent (if we just backtracked to the current node, we would only see 1 DFS node -- we cannot have a back-edge since our child did). When this happens, we might go to the wrong PARSEEK and then thinks we are answering it that we are the wrong parent and it sends us to its other adjacent DFS-like node. After that we turn out to be in the middle of the DFS path with no PARSEEK around us, so we end up losing. This actually cannot happen on subtask 5, so it is a valid solution for it. However, we can see that the issue comes from the current node's ex-children being marked as PARSEEK -- they will always be earlier in the adjacency list than the new PARSEEK. Therefore, we can fix this solution by always answering the latest/rightmost PARSEEK in our adjacency list. This needs only 4 colors and does 3N iterations, so it is also a full solution.

Code: emil_cactus_find_4_no-found-root-notpar-par_lazy-parseek.cpp

Solution storing child information:

One other idea, similar to the one storing the parent index, is to store the child's index. Namely, whenever we go down towards a child, we can see what its index (among DFS-like nodes) will be and store it in the current node. Then when we need to backtrack from a node and it sees multiple DFS-like nodes, we can guess which one the parent is. If we choose right, we are done. If we choose wrong, we can use the stored child indices to descend down to the correct parent (without changing any colors along the way).

Now we just need to figure out how to know that we are in this descend mode. For non-root nodes without back-edges, we can tell by simply checking whether the number of seen DFS-like nodes is 2 or 1: if 2, we are descending; if 1, we are in the regular mode. For the root, for now, we can just have a special color (and we never backtrack to it unless it is the only option). Finally, we can notice that we never need to descend through nodes with back edges (since it is impossible to have a back edge to a parent/grandparent of theirs), so they don't need to store child information. We can just have a special color for such nodes (found by seeing 2 DFS-like nodes when in an INIT node). Lastly, we need to not backtrack to such nodes, if we see regular DFS-like nodes. This solution uses 6 colors and needs 3N iterations.

Code: emil_cactus_child_6.cpp

We can optimize it in a similar way to our previous solution and simply remove the color for the root. This means that we may backtrack to it (if we guess wrongly). Then the root starts exploring its other subtrees (and we never encounter back-edges to the first subtree). Finally, we start backtracking in through the first subtree (and exploring any unexplored branches). In this last part, the notations of child indices of the not-yet-backtracked nodes are wrong. However, we can never see back-edges to them, since that would break the cactus property (as that whole path is part of a cycle). This uses 5 colors (and still 3N iterations).

Code: emil_cactus_child_5_no-root.cpp

Even better solutions:

We do not known whether a 3 color solution exists or whether a 4 color one exists for the unordered version of the problem. However, we have proven (using a bruteforce) that a 2 color solution does not exist even for a path (even in the ordered version).

Similarly, we do not know whether a faster than 3N solution exists with a constant number of states for the ordered or the unordered version of the problem.
